fgeyer: Article 1 (#97)
OpenElements/open-elements-website: content/posts/2023-02-07-logging-in-java-and-other-languages.md

---
outdated: false
showInBlog: true
title: "Best Practices and Anti-Pattern while Logging in Java and other Languages"
date: 2023-02-07
author: hendrik
excerpt: "Logging is an important instrument, but it's not easy to find the right amount of information to log."
categories: [Java]
origin: https://www.heise.de/blog/Best-Practices-und-Anti-Pattern-beim-Logging-in-Java-und-anderen-Sprachen-7336005.html
preview_image: "/posts/2023-02-07-logging-in-java-and-other-languages/Java_Preview.jpg"
---

> One topic that every (Java) developer will have to deal with sooner or later is logging. While a simple `System.out.println` might suffice for small example programs, learning the programming language, or quickly debugging code, it is a definite no-go for the production operation of software. At this point, the output of an application must meet certain quality criteria to be used for verification, monitoring, and analysis of the application. For this reason, there is a plethora of logging frameworks and APIs, and it is often not easy for developers to decide which strategy is the right one.

Reviewer: @circumflex3105 please do 1 sentence per line. By doing so I can add way better comments. I will wait on your feedback here before continue review

---
outdated: false
showInBlog: true
title: "Best Practices and Anti-Pattern for Logging in Java and other Languages"
date: 2023-02-07
author: hendrik
excerpt: "Logging is an important instrument, but it's not easy to find the right amount of information to log. This post will show some best pratices that help to get the best results out of a logging system."
categories: [Java]
origin: https://www.heise.de/blog/Best-Practices-und-Anti-Pattern-beim-Logging-in-Java-und-anderen-Sprachen-7336005.html

> preview_image: "/posts/2023-02-07-logging-in-java-and-other-languages/Java_Preview.jpg"

Reviewer: do we need full path here?

Author: Unfortunately yes, otherwise the img is not found.

> preview_image: "/posts/2023-02-07-logging-in-java-and-other-languages/Java_Preview.jpg"

Reviewer: Pls use lower-case filenames for assets

---

One topic that every (Java) developer will have to deal with sooner or later is logging. 
While a simple `System.out.println` might suffice for small example programs, learning the programming language, or quickly debugging code, it is a definite no-go for the production operation of software. 
At this point, the output of an application must meet certain quality criteria to be used for verification, monitoring, and analysis of the application. 

> For this reason, there is a plethora of logging frameworks and APIs, and it is often not easy for developers to decide which strategy is the right one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this reason, there is a wide range of logging frameworks and APIs, and it is often not easy for developers to decide which strategy is the right one.
```

{{< highlight java >}}
final Function<String, T> queryInTransaction = query -> {
  LOG.log("We start the transaction");
  manager.beginTransaction();
  LOG.log("DB query: " + query);
  long start = now();
  T result = manager.query(query);
  LOG.log("DB query found " + result.size() + " entities in "
          + (now() - start) + " ms");
  manager.endTransaction();
  LOG.log("Transaction done");
  return result;
}
{{< / highlight >}}

This allows us to call our operations in a readable form with maximum logging in the business logic:

{{< highlight java >}}
LOG.log("Loading all users from database");
users = queryInTransaction("select * from users");
{{< / highlight >}}

Anyone who has ever worked with logging frameworks will certainly miss the logging level as an important and central element in the previous examples. 
We will take a closer look at this to conclude. 
Although different loggers do not always define the same levels, they all have the same functionality: on a one-dimensional scale, the level indicates how important the message is in the context of all messages.

> ![Logging level scale](/posts/2023-02-07-logging-in-java-and-other-languages/logging-level-scale.jpg)

Reviewer: do we need to add the full path to the image? would the following work?:
```suggestion
![Logging level scale](logging-level-scale.jpg)
```

Reviewer: For articles I use an element like that:

{{< centered-image src="workflow-en.png" width="100%" showCaption="true" alt="Workflow of Support & Care for Apache Maven&trade;">}}

maybe we can reuse it here for same layout

Author: > For articles I use an element like that:
> 
> {{< centered-image src="workflow-en.png" width="100%" showCaption="true" alt="Workflow of Support & Care for Apache Maven™">}}
> 
> maybe we can reuse it here for same layout

I now put in both variants for comparision. The top one being your suggestion and the bottom one my initial variant. In any case, you always need the full link to the img, I tested multible ways. Please give feedback, which way of implementing the imgs you prefer.

Reviewer: @circumflex3105 the first image has a better layout for the subtitle of the image. I prefer to go with that one. Somehow the subtitle do not look correctly centered, but that is another story (created issue 
<img width="765" alt="Bildschirmfoto 2024-07-06 um 14 01 36" src="https://github.com/OpenElements/open-elements-website/assets/9443847/fc728afb-cf14-405b-9694-83aa2eec16f8">

Reviewer: created https://github.com/OpenElements/open-elements-website/issues/106 for not missing this issue.

Only the configuration needs to be adjusted, and this can even happen dynamically at runtime depending on the logging framework used. 
Additionally, such filtering can also be used to log different information in a test or production system.

## A final logging concept

Based on the general rules outlined in this blog post, you can already start defining logging practices for an application or an entire system landscape. 
Important questions to consider when creating logging rules include:

* Who will read the log file?
* What do you want to learn or extract from the logs?
* What do you NOT want to extract from the logs?
* Should there be differences in logging between different environments (Test/Production)?

As described, there are various points to consider when it comes to logging. 
Generally, it is advisable to define a concept for handling logging. 
This concept can include guidelines and best practices for internal logging management. 
It should also cover technical aspects such as preferred libraries or patterns. 
We will take a closer look at these in the next part of the series on Java logging.

> (rme)

Reviewer: PLS remove the (rme) at the end of all posts since that is the shortcut of the heise employee that published the post.
